## Question 6 (Year: 2024 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2024-gs4-q6-civilsdaily**

**2024 - “The concept of Just and Unjust is contextual. What was just a year back, may turn out to be unjust in today’s context. Changing context should be constantly under scrutiny to prevent miscarriage of justice.” Examine the above statement with suitable examples.** [Year: 2024] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

In the words of John Rawls, "Justice is the first virtue of social institutions, as truth is of systems of thought." However, **Justice **is not a static or absolute concept but a dynamic one, shaped by the evolving moral, social, and technological landscape of a society.

**The Contextual Nature of Justice**

1.** Changing political contexts. **Eg- Colonial land laws once “legal”, now seen as exploitative.

2.** Changing economic contexts. **Eg- shift of policy focus from economic growth to inclusive growth

**3. Changing socio-cultural contexts. Eg- Sati **was socially accepted earlier but now a criminal offence.

**4. Changing technological contexts. **Eg- A decade ago, **mass data harvesting **was acceptable but now criticised for "Surveillance Capitalism" and violation **Privacy**

**5. Changing legal contexts. **Eg- basic structure doctrine or Due Process (Menka Gandhi) expanding FRs

**6. Changing environmental contexts. **Eg- shift from unlimited resource extraction to intergenerational justice

**7. Changing corporate governance contexts. **Eg- shift from **profit motive to TBL (people profit planet)**

### Need for Scrutiny to Prevent Miscarriage of Justice

1.** Avoiding "Legal Anachronism" **or **"Zombie Laws." **Eg- the decriminalization of Section 497

2.** Prevent legal injustice **- Laws may become oppressive if context changes. Eg- Sedition law

3. Non scrutiny leads to **moral stagnation. Eg- persistence of manual scavenging.

4. Adapting to **changing social realities. Eg- live in relationships or single parent families

5.** Maintain legitimacy **of state. Eg- RTI Act for transparency in governance

6. Protection of vulnerable sections. Eg- legal **recognition of Mental Health.**

7.** Preventing Technological Tyranny - Eg- Right to be Forgotten **under data protection Acts

8. As a society becomes more civilized, the **"just" methods of punishment **are needed. Eg- over 100

countries abolished Death penalty

9. Addressing **"New" Harms **in the Digital Age. Eg- AI generated **Deepfakes**

**10. To uphold constitutional morality. Eg- Triple talaq **invalidated despite social practice. “The Only Constant in Life Is Change.”- **Heraclitus**

Thus, Justice must be a **"living" **concept for human progress and **"Good Life" (Eudaimonia)**
---
