## Question 35 (Year: 2021 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2021-gs4-q35-civilsdaily**

**2021 - Should impartial and being non-partisan be considered as indispensable qualities to make a successful civil servant? Discuss with illustrations.** [Year: 2021] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

A civil servant derives legitimacy not from popular mandate but from the **trust of neutrality, fairness and rule-based conduct.

**Impartiality **is the quality of making decisions based on objective criteria, merit, and facts.

**Non-partisanship **is a state of being politically neutral and serving the government with equal dedication, regardless of personal political leanings.

### Importance of Impartiality

1. Impartiality ensures that **all citizens are treated equally **regardless of status, identity or political affiliation. Eg- Kiran Bedi towing vehicle of PM

2. Maintaining **Public Trust and belief in fairness **of administration - strengthens legitimacy. Eg- UPSC selection process

3.** Promotes inclusivity and Social Justice- **Eg- **S. Shankaran **in implementing the **Bonded Labour Abolition Act**

4.** Prevents misuse of power. Eg- **Ashok Khemka (IAS) **cancelled illegal land deals irrespective of political interests.

5.** Enables fair grievance redressal. Eg- **U Sagayam (IAS) **conducted impartial inquiries into granite mining.

6. Ensures **efficiency in resource utilization. Eg- **E. Sreedharan **ensuring objectivity in the awarding of contracts for the Delhi Metro.

7. Promotes **professional ethics **by ensuring adherence to principles of neutrality, selflessness and accountability.

### Importance of Non-partisanship

1.** Continuity of Government- **Eg- The smooth transition of power in India since independence

2.** Fearless Advice **on the legality of a political directive.

3.** Efficient Crisis Management- **In communal or ethnic tensions, an impartial officer is the only trusted mediator.

4. It prevents the **"cooking of books" **(like GDP or employment figures) to suit a political party's re-election campaign.

5.** Prevents politicisation of bureaucracy. **Eg- **Durga Shakti Nagpal **resisting political interference.

6.** Maintains professional autonomy. **Eg- RBI independence in monetary policy.

7. Prevents **authoritarian tendencies and ‘spoils system.’**

8. Safeguards **rule of law **by resisting politically motivated actions. Eg- EC’s fair application of MCC

Thus, impartiality and non-partisanship are **cardinal virtues for **preserving **democratic fairness **as well as **institutional and ethical integrity.**
---
