## Question 24 (Year: 2025 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2025-gs4-q24-civilsdaily**

**2025 - Carl von Clausewitz once said, “War is a diplomacy by other means.” Critically analyse the above statement in the present context of contemporary geo-political conflict.** [Year: 2025] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

In his seminal work **On War**, **Carl von Clausewitz** suggests that war is not an end in itself but a rational instrument of statecraft used to achieve political goals when traditional diplomatic dialogue fails.

### War is diplomacy by other means

1. Force used to extract **political concessions**. Eg-Russia’s invasion of Ukraine to block NATO expansion.

2. War alters facts on ground to **strengthen bargaining position**. Eg-Control of Crimea and Donbas.

3. **Power signalling** to deters rivals. Eg-China’s military exercises near Taiwan.

4. War reshapes **diplomatic alignments**. Eg-Pakistan-China ‘all weather friendship’ after 1962 and 1965 wars

5. **Resource diplomacy** -Control over energy and minerals via force.

6. **Negotiation through attrition** -Prolonged fighting forces compromise. Eg-US withdrawl from Afghanistan

7. **Policy of ‘bait and bloodletting’.** Eg- US support to Ukraine to weaken Russia

8. **Peace enforcement**. Eg-NATO intervention in Kosovo.

9. War is used as a tool for **regime change.** Eg- US intervention in Iraq

### Counter-argument- War is not diplomacy but its failure

1. **Humanitarian catastrophe** violates **utilitarian principle** of ‘greatest happiness’. Eg- over **1.4 million** Russian deaths in Ukraine war

2. **Rise of Non-State Actors-** Groups like **ISIS-K** dont pursue war for diplomatic aims but for ideological and religious aims.

3. War used to consolidate domestic **political legitimacy** rather than national interest**.** Eg-Wartime

nationalism in Pakistan.

4. Due to ‘**complex interdependence’** war as a diplomatic means is not a **rational choice.** Eg- US-China relations

5. War leads to **breakdown of diplomatic negotiations channels** for peaceful resolution. Eg- Security Council paralysis.

6. While diplomacy is based on reason war is based on **passion**.

7. The acute **security dilemma and zero-sum mentality** fosters diplomatic distrust and reduce possibility of diplomatic cooperation. Eg- India’s suspension of Indus water treaty.

As per Deontological ethics, means of war cant justify any ends. As pointed out by **Bertrand Russell,** "War does not determine who is right - only who is left."
---
