## Question 91 (Year: 2019 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2019-gs4-q91-civilsdaily**

**2019 - “A man is but a product of his thoughts. What he thinks he becomes.” - M.K. Gandhi** [Year: 2019] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

Gandhi highlights that **human character, behaviour and destiny are shaped fundamentally by one’s thoughts**. The **external success and failure are reflections of internal belief systems**.

**At the Individual Level,** a person who harbors thoughts of inadequacy or "helplessness" will live a life of stagnation and fear. On the other hand, someone who maintains a **Growth Mindset** views failures as lessons. Eg- **J.K. Rowling** faced multiple rejections for Harry Potter but remained untroubled.

**At the Professional Level,** those who their work as a means to earn money, become a mediocre employee. However, those who think of their work as a form of **"Karma Yoga"**, become a leader who inspires others. Eg-**Gandhiji** thought of himself not as a politician, but as a seeker of truth.

**At the Social Level,** if a society thinks in terms of "us vs. them", it becomes a fragmented and violent space. Conversely, if the prevailing thought is **"Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam"** , the society becomes inclusive and peaceful.

In **civil services**, civil servant who thinks in terms of **service and responsibility** will act ethically even under pressure, while one who thinks in terms of personal gain will drift towards **corruption**. Eg- Ashok Khemka served with integrity despite over 50 transfers.

In the **technological domain**, those who adhere to values of **honesty, compassion, respect, truth** use it in ethical manner while those who view it as a tool to vent out anger do harm to others. Eg- cyberbullying.

**“The mind is the workshop where destiny is made.”** Thus, inculcating **“GOOD” thoughts** is key for developing **“beautiful minds.”** This can be achieved through

1. Ethical parenting

2. Value education

3. Ethics training for civil servants

4. Code of Ethics for organisations

5. Inculcating constitutional ideals
---
