## Question 23 (Year: 2024 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2024-gs4-q23-civilsdaily**

**2024 - “It is not enough to talk about peace, one must believe in it; and it is not enough to believe in it, one must act upon it.” In the present context, the major weapon industries of the developed nations are adversely influencing continuation of number of wars for their own self-interest, all around the world. What are the ethical considerations of the powerful nations in today’s international arena to stop continuation of ongoing conflicts?** [Year: 2024] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**“Wars begin where ethics ends.”**

In today’s world, conflicts persist not only because of political disputes but also due to powerful economic interests, especially the global arms industry.

### Role of major weapon industries in continuation of wars

1.** Profit motive **- Eg- Surge in global arms sales after Ukraine war.

2. Wars act as "testing grounds"

3.** Lobbying in **foreign policy. Eg- Military-industrial complex in the US.

4.** Arms exports to conflict zones **- Eg- Saudi Arabia as larget defence importer

5.** Proxy wars **- Eg- supply of arms to terrorist organisations

6.** Economic dependence **- Jobs and revenue from defence industry.

7. Capitalising on **security dilemma.**

### Ethical considerations for powerful nations to stop ongoing conflicts

1.** Deontology over Utilitarianism **by **prioritizing **duty to protect human life over GDP growth. Eg-Restrict arms to regimes violating human rights.

2.** Ethical assessment **of short and long term damage of war. Eg- over **1.4 million **Russian deaths in Ukraine war

3.** Responsibility to prevent harm **- Eg- Arms embargoes in active war zones.

4.** Non-complicity principle **to avoid moral responsibility for atrocities. Eg- Stopping arms to Saudi Arabia

during Yemen war.

5. Adherence to ethical standards of the **Arms Trade treaty**

| **Ethical Criterion** | **Description** |

| --- | --- |

| **Risk Assessment** | Probability of weapons fueling genocide |

| **Gender-Based Violence** | Probability of weapons facilitating sexual violence |

| **Diversion Control** | Risk of weapons ending in black market |

6.** Addressing Strategic Hypocrisy- **Eg- advocating for a "Rules-Based Order" while signing multi-billion dollar arms deals.

7.** Support for peace processes **- Eg- UN-led peace talks.

8.** Transparency and accountability **- Eg- Parliamentary approval for arms sales.

9.** Disarmament leadership. Eg- Nuclear disarmament treaties.

10.** Ethical foreign policy **- Values-based diplomacy over realpolitik.

11.** Corporate responsibility **- Eg- Arms export compliance laws.

12.** Transitioning to "Peace Economies". Eg- **Investing in **Green Technology **as alternatives to defense manufacturing

Real peace requires a **"Moral Disinvestment" **from war. This can be achieved by taming **"Will to Power" **of the defense industry by **"rationality" **and “**moral duty**” of the state.
---
