## Question 59 (Year: 2023 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2023-gs4-q59-civilsdaily**

**2023 - “Corruption is the manifestation of the failure of core values in the society.” In your opinion, what measures can be adopted to uplift the core values in the society?** [Year: 2023] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

Corruption is the abuse of entrusted power for private gain, resulting in distortion of justice, fairness and public interest.

### Corruption as the manifestation of failure of core values

**1. Erosion of integrity**

**2. Decline of responsibility**

THE WHEEL OF CORRUPTION

**3. Weak public spirit**

**4. Normalization of unethical behaviour (sanskritization)**

**5. Loss of respect for law**

**6. Materialism over morality**

**7. Breakdown of accountability**

**8. Greed over Contentment**

**9. Loss of Professional Ethics**

**10. Materialism over Spirituality/Humanism**

### Measures to uplift core values in society

1.** Value-based education **- Ethics and civic education in schools.

2.** Family and community socialisation **- Teaching honesty at home.

3.** Media responsibility **- Highlighting integrity

stories, not just scandals.

4.** Reward ethical behaviour **- Public recognition of whistleblowers.

5.** Transparent governance **- Eg- DBT has saved over 3.5 lakh Cr of government

6.** Civic participation **- Social audits and RTI activism.

7.** Cultural reinforcement **- Films and literature celebrating moral courage.

8.** Swift and certain punishment **under Prevention of Corruption Act and Fast-track courts to end the "culture of impunity."

9. Utilizing spiritual leaders to preach **"Aparigraha" **(non-attachment) and **"Asteya" **(non-stealing).

10. Breaking **politician-bureaucrat-civil servant nexus (Vohra committee)**

    **a. Transparency in political funding**

    **b. Civil services board **for transparent postings and transfers

By fostering **integrity, empathy, and public spirit, we can move from a society of "Rules" to a society of

"Character," where corruption finds no soil to take root.
---
