## Question 58 (Year: 2022 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2022-gs4-q58-civilsdaily**

**2022 - Whistle blower, who reports corruption and illegal activities, wrongdoing and misconduct to the concerned authorities, runs the risk of being exposed to grave danger, physical harm and victimization by the vested interests, accused persons and his team. What policy measures would you suggest to strengthen the protection mechanism to safeguard the whistle blower?** [Year: 2022] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

A whistleblower is described as the **"conscience of the organization." **They are individuals who, out of a sense of public duty, report corruption and misconduct within an organization to competent authorities. **Risks faced by whistle blower**

1.** Leak of identity - Eg- Satyendra Dubey’s **identity was leaked despite his request for anonymity to the PMO.

1.** Violent Assault and Murder- S. Manjunath (2005), an IOCL officer, was shot dead.

2.** Unnatural Deaths- **In the **Vyapam Scam, nearly 40 people died under suspicious circumstances.

3.** Institutional Victimization- **transferred to remote postings repeatedly to break their morale.

4.** False Disciplinary Inquiries **on fabricated charges of insubordination or breach of conduct.

5.** Social Ostracization- **labeled as "snitches" or "disloyal".

6.** Economic Harassment- **withholding promotions, denying increments etc.

7.** Legal Entrapment **under the **official secrets Act (1923)**

### Policy Measures to Strengthen the Protection Mechanism

1.** Strict "Anonymity by Design"- **Eg- encrypted digital portal for reporting

2.** Criminalizing the Leak of Identity**

3.** Proactive Threat Assessment **to provide immediate security or relocation.

4.** Financial Incentives (Bounty System)- **Following the **U.S. False Claims Act, whistleblowers should be entitled to a percentage of the money recovered from the exposed scam.

5. Protection must extend to **private sector employees and contractors, as corruption often involves **public-private nexuses.

6.** Time-Bound Investigation **to minimize the "exposure time" of the complainant.

7.** Whistleblower Defense Fund **to provide legal aid and psychological counseling.

8.** Witness Protection Programs- **"Relocation and Identity Change" services for whistleblowers and their families.

9. Establishing **"Integrity Awards" **(potentially awarded anonymously or post-retirement) to change the social narrative from "snitching" to "patriotism."

10.** Providing job security **and protection against **"Victimization" **through **independent **ombudsman

A whistleblower is a vital cog in the machinery of **Good Governance. Their safety is essential to maintain **probity **in administration.
---
