## Question 84 (Year: 2022 | Paper: GS IV)

**2022 - Ethics is knowing the difference between what you have the right to do and what is right to do.’-Potter Stewart . [Year: 2022] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

The statement highlights the tension between **Law and **Morality. While the law tells us what we are permitted to do without being punished, ethics tells us what we should do to be a person of character.
**Legal “Right” - It is an **entitlement that protects our freedom of action.
**Ethical “Right” - It is a **responsibility and compass that directs our actions toward the common good.
**Relevance in present context
1. **1. Freedom of Speech vs. Social Harmony - Responsible use of words to prevent harm to others.
1. **2. Corporate Profit vs. Environmental Stewardship - An ethical corporation chooses to invest in green technology to emit zero waste, even if it lowers their short-term profit. **Eg- Patagonia
1. While **consumers have legal right to buy product of their choice, the right thing to do is practice consumerism and responsible consumption **(SDG 12)
1. **4. Red Tapism vs Probity - A civil servant has administrative discretion to **delay or deny services for documentation errors, but the right thing to do is practicing **compassion and integrity.
1. **5. Professional rights vs. Moral Compass - A lawyer has a legal right to use a technicality to get a dangerous criminal acquitted. But ethics involves thinking about safety of society.
1. **6. Intellectual Property vs. Life-Saving Access - Pharma companies have the legal right to charge high prices for drugs. But the "right" thing to do is to share patents or lower prices to ensure the poor can survive. **Eg- Jonas Salk not patenting Polio vaccine
1. Financial Gain vs. Social Contribution - Adherence to **Trusteeship principle by ensuring tax compliance.
1. Professional Secrecy vs. Public Safety - While an employee has the **legal right to remain silent about defect due to a signed Non-Disclosure Agreement, the **right thing is to blow the whistle.
1. Whistleblowing vs loyalty - Loyalty is right, exposing corruption is right thing.
1. **10. Media sensationalism vs dignity - while Media has freedom to report on sensational issues, right thing is to respect privacy and dignity of victims. Eg- Sushant Singh Rajput case
1. Not voting in elections is legally allowed but ethically wrong. Eg- low turnouts in urban areas
1. A **minister has legal right to appoint any officer as secretary but the right thing to do is **ensuring meritocracy
Ethical societies are sustained not by rules alone, but by citizens and leaders who choose what is right even when they have the right not to.

---
