## Question 5 (Year: 2023 | Paper: GS IV)

**2023 - Differentiate ‘moral intuition from ‘moral reasoning’ with suitable examples. [Year: 2023] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**Ethical decision-making is the process by which individuals evaluate options and make choices based on moral principles. It is **"dual-process" system based on **emotional insight (**intuition) and **rational evaluation (reasoning)
**Moral Intuition
**Moral Reasoning
Spontaneous, automatic moral response.
Deliberate, reflective moral evaluation. Eg- firing as a
Eg- firing in self defense
‘last resort’ on violent Mob
Immediate. Occurs in millisecond
Slow. Requires time for reflection.
driven by "gut feelings."
Primarily cognitive
The process is hidden
logic can be explained to others.
Moves from "feeling" to "judgment."
Moves from "evidence" to "conclusion."
Based on emotions, empathy, social conditioning. Eg- prejudice towards Posititutes
Based on logic, ethical principles, critical thinking.
Eg- restricting movement of prostitutes due to Health concerns
Largely unconscious
Conscious and intentional
High Susceptibility to bias.
Low bias due to logical reasoning
Consistency may vary across situations and persons
More stable across similar cases
Useful for obvious wrongs
Necessary for complex conflicts
**Examples
1. **1. Moral Intuition
1. a. The "Railway Track" Heroism by Nicholas Winton
1. b. The "Yuck" Factor in Bioethics
1. **2. Moral Reasoning
1. a. The Triage Decision in healthcare during crisis
1. b. Kesavananda Bharati judgment - **Moral and Legal Reasoning to develop the "Basic Structure Doctrine."
1. c. Corporate Downsizing Decisions based on utilitarianism
**Moral Intuition is the "Hero" who acts in the moment, while **Moral Reasoning is the "Sage" who builds the system. Both are necessary for a morally complete life.

---
