## Question 7 (Year: 2021 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2021-gs4-q7-civilsdaily**

**2021 - “Integrity is a value that empowers the human being.” Justify with suitable illustration.** [Year: 2021] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

Integrity is the alignment of **Manasa (Thought), Vacha (Word), and Karmana (Action). **In the words of **C. S. Lewis, **“Integrity is doing the right thing even when no one is watching.”

### Role of integrity in empowers human being

### Empowerment at the Personal Level

1.** Inner Peace- **Integrity eliminates the **"cognitive dissonance" **and provides the mental energy needed to focus on goals.

2. Integrity ensures **predictability and reliability **in behavior - Key qualities of a **natural leader. **Eg- Mahatma Gandhi’s adherence to Ahimsa in personal life

3.** Integrity **acts as a foundation of genuine **self-esteem **and **confidence. Eg- Sanchin

Tendulkar refusing advertisement of Tobacco and Cigarettes brands.

### Empowerment at the Family Level

1. Parents with integrity empower children with a living blueprint of **"The Good Life".

2. Integrity creates an environment of **emotional safety **and **trust **within the family.

3. “The strength of a nation derives from the integrity of the home.” - **Confucius**

### Empowerment at the Social Level

1.** Builds Social Capital- **Integrity is the **"currency" **of social trust.

2.** Inspiration to Others **("ripple effect" of goodness). Eg- **Babasaheb Ambedkar **inspiring generations of Dalit leaders

3.** Catalyst for social change **- Eg- **Rosa Parks’s **refusal to give up her bus seat led to the Civil Rights Movement.

### Empowerment at the Professional Level

1.** Moral Courage- **the **“inner transparency” **empowers a person to speak truth to power. Eg- Satyendra Dubey

2. Integrity builds a **reputation **and **trust **that acts as a multiplier for one’s influence and opportunities. Eg-Metro man **E. Sreedharan**

3. Gives **moral authority **to lead. Eg- **Captain Vikram Batra **leading from the front in Kargil War.

4. Integrity helps in **objective decision making. **Eg- T. N. Session as CEC

5.** Knowledge without integrity is dangerous and dreadful. Eg- developing of Nuclear bomb

Thus, integrity provides **"oneness" **that builds character and ensures that actions are rooted in truth, justice, and dignity.
---
