## Question 102 (Year: 2025 | Paper: GS IV)

**2025 - What are the major teachings of Mahavir? Explain their relevance in the contemporary world. [Year: 2025] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**Lord Mahavira (24th Tirthankara of Jainism) propounded an ethical and spiritual path based on **right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct (Triratna) for the liberation of the soul.
### **Major teachings of Mahavira and their relevance in the contemporary world
1. **1. Ahimsa - Non-injury in thought, word, and deed towards all living beings.
1. a. Promotes peace in a world affected by **war, terrorism, and social unrest. Eg- Russia-Ukraine War
1. b. Most powerful alternative to the **"Might is Right" doctrine - inspire non-violent civil rights movements and peace-building initiatives globally. Eg- LGBTQ movement
1. **2. Satya (Truthfulness) - Speaking the truth in a way that does not harm others.
1. a. Ensures **integrity in public and private life.
1. b. Helps in **combating misinformation and corruption
1. c. Promoting the verifiable truth in digital and political discourse - antidote to the "Deepfake" and "Fake News"
1. **3. Asteya (Non-stealing) - Not taking anything that is not willingly given.
1. a. Promotes **Ethical economy, responsible production and consumption. Eg- avoiding greenwashing
1. b. Reduces crimes and theft
1. **4. Aparigraha (Non-possession) - Renunciation of excessive accumulation and greed.
1. a. **Remedy for consumerism and climate crisis. Encourages sustainable lifestyles and minimalism.
1. **5. Brahmacharya (Self-control) - Discipline of mind and body for spiritual progress.
1. a. Self discipline and simple living **enhances mental well-being.
1. b. Can help reduce **suicide and anxiety issues among youth
1. **6. Anekantavada - Acceptance of multiple perspectives of truth.
1. a. Helps in **managing ideological conflicts in multicultural societies. Eg- Manipur violence
1. b. Promotes **tolerance, ideals of sarv dharma samabhav and vaisudhaiva kutumbkam
1. **7. Equality of all life forms - Every living being possesses a soul and deserves respect.
1. a. Compassion for all life supports ecological balance. Eg- Vegetarianism and vegan movements.
1. **b. Promotes active citizenship - Encourages ethical decision-making in democracy and governance.
In an age of rapid technological and economic change, his message of **ethical self-transformation and harmony with all life forms offers a timeless path for building a peaceful and sustainable world.
**[Case Study 1] Vijay is the Deputy Commissioner of a remote district of Himachal Pradesh. For the last two years, he has been in this region. In the month of August, heavy rains lashed the complete state followed by cloudbursts in the upper reaches of the said district. The damage was very heavy in the complete state, especially in the affected district. The complete road network and telecommunication were disrupted and the buildings were damaged extensively. People’s houses have been destroyed and they were forced to stay in the open. More than 200 people have been killed and about 5000 were badly injured. The Civil Administration under Vijay got activated and started conducting rescue and relief operations. Temporary shelter camps and hospitals were established to provide shelter and medical facilities to the homeless and injured people. Helicopter services were pressed in for evacuating sick and old people from remote areas. Vijay got a message from his hometown in Kerala that his mother was seriously sick. After two days, Vijay received the unfortunate message that his mother had expired. Vijay has no close relative except one elder sister who is a US citizen and has been staying there for the last several years. In the meantime, the situation in the affected district deteriorated further due to resumption of heavy rains after a gap of five days. At the same time, continuous messages were coming on his mobile from his hometown to reach at the earliest for performing the last rites of his mother.
1. **(a) What are the options available with Vijay?
1. **(b) What are the ethical dilemmas being faced by Vijay?
1. **(c) Critically evaluate and examine each of these options identified by Vijay.
1. **(d) Which of the options, do you think, would be most appropriate for Vijay to adopt and why?
This case presents a conflict between **personal duty (performing last rites of his mother) and **public duty (leading disaster relief operations).
### Guiding Principle - Maxim of Utilitarianism - Greatest happiness of greatest number

---
