## Question 57 (Year: 2025 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2025-gs4-q57-civilsdaily**

**2025 - To achieve holistic development goal, a civil servant acts as an enabler and active facilitator of growth rather than a regulator. What specific measures will you suggest to achieve this goal?** [Year: 2025] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

“The civil servant is not a mere tool of the government; he is a servant of the people.” - **C. Rajagopalachari** For **Viksit Bharat,** civil services needs to shift from “weberian” rule-based bureaucracy to “democratic” and enabling bureaucracy.

### Holistic Development Goals

1. **Economic Inclusivity** (**Antyodaya**).

2. **Gender Equality**

3. **Environmental Sustainability**

4. **Human Capital development**

5. **Ease of Living**

**6. Good governance**

**7. Social harmony**

**Civil servant as regulator vs enabler**

| **Civil Servant as a Regulator** | **Civil Servant as an Enabler** |

| --- | --- |

| Focus on compliance | Driving growth and fostering innovation. |

| **Rule-based** | **Role-based** |

| Command and Control model (Top-down) | Collaborative mindset (participatory) |

| Reactive | Proactive |

### Measures needed

1. Promoting “**Ease of compliance**” and reducing "time-tax" on entrepreneurs and citizens. Eg- **"Deemed Approvals" and Single Windows (Bibek Debroy Committee)**

2. **Attitudinal Transformation** through **"Mission Karmayogi" -** From **Mai-Baap (patronizing)** culture toward a **citizen-first approach**.

3. **Institutionalizing Participatory Governance-** Eg- **Participatory Budgeting** model of Porto Alegre, Brazil

4. **Strengthening Public-Private-Community Partnerships (PPCP)-** Eg- In **Kudumbashree** in Kerala, civil servants facilitate growth by empowering 4.5 million women to run micro-enterprises.

5. **Data-Driven Decision Making-** Eg- **Aspirational Districts Programme** uses a real-time dashboard to rank districts - make DM as **competitive facilitator** of local development.

6. **Adopting "Nudge Theory" for Social Engineering.** Eg- **Swachh Bharat Abhiyan** succeeded because of community persuasion rather than just fining them for open defecation.

7. **Promoting Frugal Innovation-** Encouraging officers to solve local problems with available resources.

8. **Safeguarding "Honest Discretion"**by amending **Section 17A of the Prevention of Corruption Act**

9. **Facilitating "Last Mile" Digital Service Delivery** through **Common Service Centres (CSCs)**

This can help civil servants become an enabler that unlocks the **productive potential** of citizens, markets and communities.
---
