## Question 36 (Year: 2022 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2022-gs4-q36-civilsdaily**

**2022 - Apart from intellectual competency and moral qualities, empathy and compassion are some of the other vital attributes that facilitate the civil servants to be more competent in tackling the crucial issues or taking critical decisions. Explain with suitable illustrations.** [Year: 2022] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**“The purpose of power is to serve, not to rule.” **To adhere to this ethos, civil servants needs combination of IQ, ethics and compassion.

### Intellectual Competency

1.** Analytical Ability- **Eg- **V.K. Pandian (IAS) **used data analytics in sports governance in Odisha.

2.** Technological Literacy- **Eg- **J. Satyanarayana (IAS) **pioneered the 'e-Seva' project

3.** Domain Expertise- **Eg- **Dr. M. S. Swaminathan **(Green Revolution)

4.** Professionalism. **Eg- Sreedhran

5.** Legal Acumen. **Eg- **S.R. Sankaran (IAS) **used land laws to restore land to marginalized tribals.

6.** Communication Skills**

7.** Innovation- **Eg- IAS **Prashant Nair **used crowdfunding for community kitchens

### Moral Qualities

1.** Integrity- **Eg- **C.G. Somiah (IAS)**- unblemished career as the CAG of India.

2.** Fortitude- **Eg- **U. Sagayam (IAS), spent a night in a graveyard to protect evidence in a mining scam.

3.** Probity- **Eg- **Satyendra Dubey (IES) **exposed corruption in the Golden Quadrilateral project.

4.** Accountability **and **transparency. **Eg- **Satish Dhawan **taking blame for SLV-3 mission failure

5.** Impartiality- **Eg- **T.N. Seshan as CEC**

6.** Selflessness- **Eg- **Randhir Prasad Verma **(IPS) sacrificed his life while fighting armed robbers

### Importance of Empathy and Compassion

1. Empathy helps in prioritizing **utilitarian virtue of “greatest good” **over self-interest.

2.** Humanizing the Rule of Law- **Ensures rules don't become tools of oppression. **Eg- **authorizing PDS ration for a poor with leprosy.

3.** Bridging the Trust Deficit- **Compassion builds a bond between the state and the citizen.

4.** Conflict De-escalation (building social capital)- Eg- P. Vijayakumar (IPS) **using empathetic negotiation to prevent communal flares in Coimbatore.

5.** Inclusive Infrastructure- **Eg- **Dr Nidhi Patel **pioneering space lab for rural students in Bilaspur.

6.** Rehabilitation over Punishment- Eg- Kiran Bedi **introduced Vipassana and education in Tihar.

7.** Resource Mobilization- **A compassionate officer inspires others to give. **Eg- Armstrong Pame (IAS) **built a 100km "People’s Road" using crowdfunding

8.** Going beyond administrative duty **to help others. **Eg- Inayat Khan (IAS) **adopted the daughters of CRPF martyrs

9. Compassion guides in using **discretionary powers **in an ethical manner. Eg- delaying the demolition of encroachment until finalization of the rehabilitation **plan.**

10.** Vulnerability Mapping- **Empathy helps civil servants to identify those who don't have a "voice." Eg-Tamboli Ayyaj building hospitals for Adivasi’s in maoist areas.

Thus, empathy and compassion enable civil servants to convert **authority into service and law into justice.**
---
