## Question 74 (Year: 2023 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2023-gs4-q74-civilsdaily**

**2023 - What do you understand by ‘moral integrity’ and ‘professional efficiency in the context of corporate governance in India ? Illustrate with suitable examples.** [Year: 2023] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**Corporate Governance** refers to the system of rules, practices and processes by which companies are directed and controlled to balance the interests of all stakeholders.

### Moral Integrity

It refers to the consistent adherence to ethical principles, honesty, and truthfulness in all business dealings.

1. **Transparency-** Being open about financial and operational health.

2. **Accountability-** Taking responsibility for actions and failures.

3. **Whistleblowing Support-** Encouraging the reporting of internal fraud.

4. **Fairness-** Eg- **SEBI’s "Related Party Transaction" rules** to prevent promoters from siphoning funds to their own private entities.

5. **Probity** - Avoidance of impropriety and unethical conduct.

6. **Truthfulness in Marketing-** Not misleading the public about products.

7. **Trusteeship-** Viewing wealth as a social trust. Eg- **Tata Group**- 66% equity held by philanthropic trusts.

8. **Conflict of Interest Management-** Keeping personal and professional roles separate.

9. **Environmental Stewardship-** Eg- **Godrej Consumer Products** achieving "Plastic Neutrality" ahead of government mandates.

**Example** - Tanishq’s **"Karatmeter"** machine - allow customers to check the purity of their gold for free.

### Professional Efficiency

**It** is the competency and capability of the management to achieve maximum output (profits/value) with minimum waste (capital/time).

1. **Prudent Capital Allocation-** Investing money where it generates the highest returns. Eg- **Asian Paints** consistently delivering high RoI through investment in supply chains.

2. **Risk Management-** Identifying and mitigating financial threats. Eg- **Kotak Mahindra Bank**- efficient lending practices.

3. **Technological Agility-** Adapting to digital trends to stay relevant.

4. **Supply Chain Excellence-** Eg- **Maruti Suzuki**-pioneering "Just-in-Time" (JIT) manufacturing in India to reduce inventory costs.

5. **Human Resource Optimization-** Training and retaining high-quality talent.

6. **Strategic Foresight-** Predicting future market shifts. Eg- **Mahindra & Mahindra** shift toward EVs and SUVs.

7. **Cost efficiency-** Producing quality goods at the most competitive price. Eg- Indian IT sector

8. **Adherence to Timelines-** Delivering projects without delays.

9. **Customer-Centric Innovation** for improving user experience

**Example** - **Maruti Suzuki’s** adoption of Japanese lean production systems improved productivity, quality and cost efficiency in Indian automobile manufacturing.

“Commerce without morality is a sin” - **Mahatma Gandhi.**
---
