## Question 44 (Year: 2019 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2019-gs4-q44-civilsdaily**

**2019 - “Non-performance of duty by a public servant is a form of corruption”. Do you agree with this view? Justify your answer.** [Year: 2019] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

“The greatest corruption is the corruption of duty.” - **Edmund Burke**

Conventionally, corruption is viewed as the "misuse of public office for private gain," however, in a broader ethical sense, **omission **(failing to act) is as damaging as **commission **(acting wrongly).

**Non-performance of duty as form of corruption 1. Breach of the "Social Contract" - **The public pays taxes in exchange for services. Non-performance is a unilateral breach of this trust.

projects

6. Inaction is a betrayal of the **"fiduciary duty" **owed to the citizens. Eg- Police officers failing to register an FIR in SC, ST atrocity cases.

7.** Wastage of Resources- **Eg- food grains roting in **FCI **godowns while tribal populations suffer from malnutrition.

8. When officials don't work, citizens **lose faith in democracy **and turn to **extra-constitutional means for justice. **Eg- **rise of "vigilante justice"**

9.** Moral hazard - **Inaction normalises irresponsibility.

10.** Facilitates exploitation. Eg- Labour inspectors not enforcing minimum wage laws.

### Ways to Curb Corruption and Non-Performance

1.** Code of Ethics & Code of Conduct. (2nd ARC)**

2.** Implementation of Citizens’ Charters- **Eg- SAKALA (Karnataka Guarantee of Services Act)

3. Giving legal backing to **Social Audits**

4.** Leveraging Technology. **Eg- Faceless Income Tax Assessment

5. Strengthening the **Lokpal and Lokayuktas **to investigate "maladministration" and "neglect"

6.** Independent Commission Against Corruption - "Hong Kong Model"**

**7. Performance-linked accountability. **Eg- 360 degree feedback

A culture of **active responsibility, diligence and accountability **is needed to deal with the menace of corruption.
---
