## Question 27 (Year: 2021 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2021-gs4-q27-civilsdaily**

**2021 - Attitude is an important component that goes as input in the delopement of human. How to build a suitable needed for a public servant?** [Year: 2021] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

**Attitude **refers to a person’s predisposition to think, feel and act in a particular way. In the words of **Lou Holtz, "Ability is what you're capable of doing. Motivation determines what you do. Attitude determines how well you do it."**

### Importance of Attitude in the Development of Humans

1.** Knowledge Function- **Attitudes help humans **organize and simplify complex information. **Eg-positive attitude toward "Digital Governance" make it easier to implement new tech-tools.

2.** Ego-Defensive Function- **Protects self-esteem and emotional stability. Eg- Coping with failure without losing confidence.

3.** Value-Expressive Function- **Attitudes allow humans to express their central values.

4.** Instrumental function **- Guides behaviour to achieve rewards and avoid punishment.

5.** Adaptive (utilitarian) function **- Helps individuals adjust to social and professional environments

6. Attitude acts as a **"behavioral compass," **ensuring consistency in beliefs and actions, leading to a sense of "Wholeness."

7.** Decision-making function **- Influences judgement and choices.

### Ways to build a suitable attitude for a public servant

1. Internalising **constitutional and ethical values. **Eg- Ethics training at LBSNAA.

2.** Sensitivity Training **through **village immersion **programs for breaking the "Elite Bubble."

3. Practicing **Self-reflection **for recognising biases and emotional triggers. Eg- reflective journaling.

4. Developing **Emotional intelligence **through mindfulness and counselling sessions for managing stress and conflict constructively.

5.** Role modelling. Eg- **"Technocratic Optimism" **of E. Sreedharan for a solution-oriented attitude

6. Learning **responsibility **through transparency. Eg- Social audits and RTI processes.

7.** Continuous learning **for updating knowledge and perspectives. Eg- Mid-career training.

8.** Adversity Simulation - **Creating high-pressure scenarios in a controlled environment to build **resilience. **Eg- "crisis-room" simulation during training

9.** Peer-to-Peer De-biasing- **Group sessions to identify and dismantle hidden prejudices and develop **objectivity. **Eg- Using **Implicit Association Tests (IAT)**

10.** Feedback Loops- **Direct citizen interaction to develop compassion and leadership. Eg- Jan Sunwais

11.** Historical Analysis of Failures **to build **Proactiveness. **Eg- Analyzing the **Bhopal Gas Tragedy **to foster an attitude of "Precautionary Vigilance" rather than "Post-facto Compliance."

These can help in shifting from a **"Command and Control" mindset **to **"Collaborate and Care" attitude **among public servants
---
