## Question 8 (Year: 2018 | Paper: GS IV)

**Question ID: 2018-gs4-q8-civilsdaily**

**2018 - “In looking for people to hire, you look for three qualities- integrity, intelligence and energy. And if they do not have the first, the other two will kill you.” - Warren Buffett** [Year: 2018] [Marks: 10]

### Answer

Integrity without knowledge is weak and useless, and

knowledge without integrity is dangerous and dreadful -**Samuel Johnson**

1. **Intelligence + Energy - Integrity** = **DANGER** .

2. **Integrity + Intelligence - Energy** = **STAGNATION**

3. **Integrity + Energy - Intelligence** = **INEFFICIENCY**

4. **All Three Combined** = **SUSTAINABLE LEADERSHIP.**

### Consequences of Intelligence and Energy

Without Integrity

1. **Sophisticated Fraud-** A smart individual can bypass internal controls and audit trails. Eg-**Bernie Madoff** running ponzi scheme.

2. High energy without integrity leads to **"winning at any cost,"** resulting in a toxic **"cut-throat"**

culture that destroys team morale.

3. **Reputational damage-** Eg- manipulation of financial data to show "**paper profits,**" in **Enron case**

4. **Erosion of Stakeholder Trust - Eg- The NSE Co-location Case (Chitra Ramkrishna).**

5. **Systemic Exploitation** by finding loopholes in laws or company policies. Eg- Nirav Modi - PNB Fraud

6. **Corrosive Leadership-** "If ethics are poor at the top, that behavior is copied down through the organization." - **Robert Noyce** (Intel Co-founder)

7. **Legal risks-** Eg- **Subrata Roy’s (Sahara India)** massive "shadow banking" empire

8. **The "Smart Criminal" Effect-** intelligent and high energy do the wrong things faster and higher in scale. Eg- Harshad Metha

**On the other hand, integrity ensures**

1. **Moral Courage-** Eg- Satyendra Dubey

2. Integrity builds a **reputation** and **trust**.. Eg- Metro man **E. Sreedharan**

3. Gives **moral authority** to lead. Eg- **Captain Vikram Batra** leading from the front in Kargil War.

4. Integrity helps in **objective decision making.** Eg- T. N. Session as CEC

5. Ensures adherence to Gandhian **“Trusteeship principle”**

Integrity is not an optional virtue but a necessary safeguard for **ethical corporate governance**
---
